On March 20, 1888, Watson is returning from a patient and happens to walk by Baker Street. He meets up with Sherlock Holmes, who is back at Baker Street again, working on some new cases. Watson has not seen Holmes lately because he has been preoccupied with his own affairs and his marriage. The two men are worlds away from each other. Watson notes that Holmes never talks about his softer passions, such as love or passion for the ladies, since they would distract him from his more important work. Yet there is but one woman in Holmes' life whom he seems to be obsessed with, and that is the Countess Adler. Several months have passed since Watson saw Holmes, and he has heard vague reports of what he had been up to: visits to Odessa, solving cases, clearing up old ones, and so on. But other than that, Watson has heard nothing. Until this day. One night, while strolling through Baker Street, Watson happens to pass Holmes' apartment. As he passes the door where he used to hang out when he was wooing Watson, he is seized with a desire to see Holmes again. So he goes in, and Holmes greets him warmly. His manner is not effusive, but he is glad to see him. Holmes puts on a charm offensive on Watson, first complimenting his fashion sense and then explaining how he deduced that Watson's left shoe had six distinct cuts on it caused by someone who had scraped dirt round the edges around the sole to remove crusted mud. Similar cuts were found on Watson's shoes as well. Holmes then shows Watson a letter he had recently received. The note contained in the note was unsigned and did not have an address. It said that a man wanted to see Dr. Sewards expertise on a matter of "great importance. Be in his chamber then at 8 p.m. Do not forget to wear a mask. Watson wonders what Holmes could possibly deduce from the writing, but Holmes cautions him against
Holmes analyzes the words in the note and realizes that the handwriting is German, which confuses the English language. They now need to find the owner of the note, who apparently lives in Bohemia. A knock comes at the door, and a large man wearing a black mask enters. He asks if Holmes has had his note, and says that he would like some help. Holmes gives him the name 'Sigismond von Ormstein', and the man tears off his mask and throws it on the floor. He then explains that he is the king of Bohemia and requests that Holmes and Watson help him. The man tells them the story of how he came to know the famous "Adler" woman. Some years ago, when he was in Poland, he fell in love with her. Then he wrote some compromising letters to her using her name and address, and is trying to get them back. He wants them to keep the letters for two years, so that nothing happens to him or his friends. At the end of that time, he hopes, the matter will no longer be of importance. When Holmes closes his eyes, the man paces up and down in agitation. It turns out the man is Count Krammer, the head of theEGG, or company, or whatever the company is called. He explains that this case involves the House of Ormsstein, one of the most powerful families in Europe.
Watson and Holmes meet again at Baker Street. This time Holmes tells him the real story of how he spent his morning, and why he did what he did. Back when Holmes was only a prince, the King of Scandanavia had a photograph of his wife stolen. He states that it must be recovered and she must pay for it. She will not sell it, so it has been stolen five times. The King says that Irene is planning on using the photograph to ruin him as he is about to get married; she threatens to send the photograph after the wedding, which will take place next Monday. There is also a safe containing some money in the photograph, and the King gives Holmes the money. Before leaving, Holmes asks Watson to come back at 3 p.m. the next day to discuss the details of the case. That afternoon Watson arrives but Holmes has not returned. So he waits by the fire. Holmes comes out of his bedroom dressed in his old tweed suit and laughs heartily for a few minutes. Then he tells Watson the rest of the story of his morning. First he left the house dressed as a groom. Next he went to Briony lodge where the beautiful Miss Adler resided. He gave the ostlers a helping hand with their horses and got all the information he could want about her. He found out that she was very popular with the men of the neighborhood and that she had one male visitor who lived there regularly -- a lawyer named Godfrey Norton. After hearing this bit of news, Watson begins to think of a political action plan. He drives out to see if he can find out more about the relationship between Irene and Mr. Norton.
The Doctor follows John and Irene to the church, where she is married. At the altar, he is "half-dragged" along by the couple and helps them tie the knot. Afterwards, the Doctor gets a meal and is asked to stand near the window and wait for the signal that is to be thrown into the room. He will then raise a cry of fire and join them at the corner. The scene is to take place in two hours. In his role as a clergyman, he pretends to be neutral and allows the Doctor to stay behind and watch. They reach Serpentine Avenue at about six o'clock. The neighborhood is described as less strict than the Doctor had expected. A group of young men are smoking outside the front door of the house. Two women are in the house with a nurse and a young woman who is apparently a nursemaid. The Doctor paces up and down inside waiting for the arrival of Irene's husband
The men speculate as to where Irene might be hiding the photograph, but they know that she won't let them into her house. Just then, a fight breaks out outside Briony's house and a man is injured in the scuffle. Holmes rushes into the street to protect the woman, but he gets knocked down by a group of men and has a bloodied face. People come to his aid, and after he revives, they bring him into the house. The doctor senses that there is no way Irene will give up the photograph now, so he decides to wait until the next morning to show it to her.
On his way out of the building, a young man passes by Holmes on the street, and Holmes recognizes the voice as that of an ulster whom he had met on Baker Street. Later that night, the king of Bohemia stops by to see Holmes. He is eager to know if Holmes has solved the case. Holmes tells him that he hasn't yet, but that he has "hopes." The next morning the king inquires about the whereabouts of the papers. Holmes rushes into the drawing room and finds that Irene has left England with her husband for the Indian subcontinent. The papers are gone. Holmes finds a photograph of Irene and a letter addressed to him from her. The letter thanks Holmes for his detective work and asks for any help he can give. Holmes gives the letter to the king, who promptly rewards him with the snake-ring and, importantly, the photograph. After the king reads the letter, Holmes returns to his study to prepare for the following day's meeting with the king.